Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
of the Dissenter. I'm your host as always, Ricardo
Lops, and today I'm joined by Patrick Foote. He's
the creator of the YouTube channel Name Explain, where
he uncovers the origins of names and highlights many
other aspects of language. And today we're going to
talk about his latest book, Immigrant Tongues, exploring how
languages moved, evolved and defined us. So Patrick, welcome
to the show where I've been a very big
fan of your channel for a long time, so
thank you so much for doing this. Oh,
you're more than welcome. No, thank you so much
for having me on. No, any excuse to chat
with people. My job is mainly just me. I,
I, I don't know if you can see, but
my office is under the stairs in my house,
so most of my time is spent just under,
under the stairs in a windowless room alone. So
it's terrific to be able to chat with someone.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me on,
Ricardo.
Yeah, great. So uh let me first ask you
before we get into the actual book, uh, what
got you interested in languages and linguistics?
Ah, so great question. It kind of, I've, I've
always been interested in English, like language from school.
Um, English was by and far my favorite lesson.
And it was only a bit later down the
line when I was in college, which isn't university
Hindu, it's a whole thing, but it it's basically
a higher education but a step below university. Doesn't
matter, too much details. Um, I took a course
of English, uh, language and linguistics. It's kind of
like a something to fill in my, uh. My
schedule I was like, oh yeah I'll do I
like English lit so I might like, and from
there I just kind of really fell in love
to it. There's something really fun about language and
linguistics. I kind of refer to it so it
was like a word like it's like maths but
for words that you add this, then you add
this and you get this kind of word and
I kind of that sort of nitty gritty of
linguistics I really enjoy through that. And then I
kind of, as I kind of wanted to make
a YouTube channel focusing on language, I kind of
wanted to think, well, what's a more unique aspect
of language I could cover that no one else
is really focusing on at the time, almost well
well over 10 years ago now I began name
Explain. And I thought about oh etymology, no one's
really kind of focusing mainly on etymology and of
names of places so I kind of just dove
into it from there and yeah it's just been
a it's been a it's been a great time
ever since.
Yeah, so I mean, I guess that uh one
of the questions we could start with is actually
what is a language? I mean, at what point
does a language become another and how do we
distinguish between languages?
Oh, that's a great question. So when does something
become a language? Gosh, that's one of those big
old questions that everyone, that all linguists kind of
want to know the answers to, I guess. I
think what, I mean, I'm tempted to say that
what defines a language from gibberish is where multiple
people understand it. But there are instances of just,
yeah, if someone, uh, is like a con language,
for example, a constructed language, that's kind of a
language just one person knows. Does that count as
a language? Does it have to be defined by?
The, the ability for multiple people to speak it.
I think it's basically where structured sounds and in
turn their written forms have meanings behind them. I
guess at its core sense, that's what you could
define a language as being when the sounds aren't
just nonsense gibberish, when they have, when those sounds
have extended meaning behind them. That's when it becomes
a language, it's even better when it's universally understood,
like we all know that when I go dog,
I'm not making a random sound, I'm saying the
name for those things with wacky tails and four
legs, like that's the core of language in my
estimations.
So how can different ways of speaking the same
language keep being the same language, like for example,
British English and American English or I mean and
Portuguese, European Portuguese and Brazilian Portuguese.
So there's a great book, I think it's just
called A Short History of Language by a guy
called David Crystal, a fantastic linguist from here in
the UK. And he talks about this as well.
So you've got, um, languages and dialects. They're the
main two ways of splitting these sort of things
up. And he said a great way to think
about this. Say if you've got 4 people at
a table, I can't remember the exact people, so
I'm gonna kind of go a bit different with
it. One's from Liverpool, one's from London, one's from
Bordeaux, and one's from Paris. Say they can only
understand their own languages. The guy from London and
the guy from Liverpool are gonna understand one another.
It's gonna be a very different form of English,
but they're gonna understand one another. That's a dialect
at play. While the guy from Bordeaux and the
guy from Paris, they're gonna understand one another as
well. It's gonna be two very different forms of
French, but French nonetheless, that's kind of. There's not
really one definitive way to define when something's a
dialect and when something's a language. You could argue
something like American English and British English or even
as you mentioned, um, continental Portuguese and Brazilian Portuguese.
You could very well argue they're two completely different
languages, but I imagine if you were to be
speaking with a native Brazilian, you'd be able to
understand them quite easily, yeah?
Yes, yes, I can understand them quite easily. I
mean there's a few words here and there that
are different, but yeah, for the most part we
can understand one another. Yeah. Yeah,
same with if I'm when I'm talking to an
American, it's, that's kind of the way to put
it, it's when you can understand what, despite the
fact there's differences, you can still understand one another
fairly easily, whereas the guy from London and the
guy from Bordeaux, they're not gonna understand each other
at all unless they speak French or English respectively.
So before we get into some of the languages
whose migration you explore in your book, what are
the different ways that languages migrate? I mean, how
can they do that?
Oh gosh, it's all sorts of ways really, but.
It's mainly like physical movement and we don't, when,
when, when we think of things moving in this
day and age, we often think of being more
sort of digital, especially when we think about communication
moving. We think of what we're doing right now.
You're in Portugal, I'm here in the UK, yeah,
we're speaking to each other like we're in the
exact same room. Obviously in the past this kind
of movement of language wasn't possible. It was people
marching on their own 2 ft. It was a
ship sailing over oceans. That's how languages migrated in
the far past and even in the not so
far past as well. It's, it's literally this physical
movement of people who speak one language, going somewhere
else and sticking around there for long enough for
the language to take hold. It literally is a
physical movement of people and in turn their languages.
Mhm. So of course, I mean, er I speak
Portuguese or at least it's my native tongue, and
it derived from Latin, so, and that's actually one
of the languages that you explore in your book.
So tell us a little bit about Latin, where
did it originate exactly?
So Latin originated roughly I think it was called
lingara. I, I do mention it in the book.
Unfortunately, all the information from the book is and
doesn't stay in my head unfortunately. But it's a
region of, yeah, it's a region of Italy that
does equate somewhat to where Rome can be found
now, kind of down the uh western coast of
the boot. Uh, AND Latin kind of evolved from
there. It was inspired by a lot of other
different languages spoken in the area. It wasn't the
only thing spoken in on the Italian peninsula at
the time. There were all kinds of different languages.
And because it was the one spoken by Romulus
and Remus, if we believe they existed, obviously the
origin of Rome is much more mythology than history
at this point. But because that was the language
they spoke and Rome out of all the empires
and city-states that existed in Rome at in in
Italy at that time, cos that was the one
that took off in a big way. It led
to Latin taking over that entire peninsula and in
turn a huge chunk of Europe. So that Latin,
Latin wasn't special by any means. It wasn't, I
mean you could even kind of argue no language
is particularly special. No singular language is destined to
be more prominent than the than the other. It's
the people who speak it who end up allowing
that language to become so big and vital in
the on the world stage, and that's kind of
what happened with Latin. It was just, it was
just another tongue of Italy. And it but it
happened to be the tongue, which took off in
a big way cos of the people who spoke
it did some pretty, pretty big things, put it
bluntly.
Yeah, and one of those big things was conquering
other peoples,
right? Yeah, that's, uh, if you've read the book,
which I know you have, thank you very much,
if anyone listening has read the book, a lot
of it is about conquering, whether that be the
Romans conquering large parts of Europe or. Turkic speakers
conquering uh Anatolia, uh, Asia Minor in modern day
Turkey maybe more or less, or even, uh, Spanish
or Portuguese or British people like like myself and
yourself conquering parts of what was called the New
World, which we now know as North and South
America.
Mhm, YEAH, so we're going to get a little
bit into that later, but I mean as the
Roman Empire spread across Europe, it er actually also
replaced other languages, right, or not?
Yeah, no, totally, it did, it replaced a load
of languages. I think the most interesting story of,
Languages being replaced in Europe, uh, the various Celtic
languages, I mean Celto-Iberian, I believe that would have
been, was that spoken in Portugal? It was spoken
on the Iberian Peninsula. uh, BUT when we think
of Celtic languages today. It's so linked with where
I'm living right now, the UK, um, Welsh, er,
Cornish, Manx, Scottish Gaelic, Irish. They're all we have
left of Celtic languages this day, and it's kind
of for when you think of the Celtic speaking
world, you kind of think of here, but that's,
that's so not the case. Celtic languages originated in
Europe. I think they might have even originated on
the Iberian Peninsula. I can't remember that for sure.
But there were loads of them all around the
continent. And eventually, thanks to Rome, all of them
died and the only ones that survived were the
ones in the far outreaches of Europe, the ones
that you had to travel over the English Channel
to get to. And even then they're only in
the far pockets of the UK. They're in Cornwall
and Scotland and Wales, which are very much more
inhospitable in the far past for the Romans to
get to, so those Celtic languages could hold on
there. Likewise in Ireland and the Isle of Man,
they could hold them there cos they're even further
removed by more ocean by the Irish Sea. You
don't, you don't wanna go through the Irish Sea,
it's a rough old place.
So I mean perhaps Latin will be a good
example for us to explore here in terms of
how languages evolved from one another. So how did
the Romance languages then evolved, evolve from Latin?
So it's kind of a case by case scenario.
As I sort of talk about in the book,
when Latin, when the Romans arrived in a new
part of what would become their empire in a
new part of Europe, let's say the Iberian Peninsula,
an example. As mentioned, they, they, they weren't blank
canvases, there are already multiple different languages being spoken
there. There were all those Celtic languages I mentioned
to to name a few. Uh, Latin and the
Romans would come and be like, this is our
land now, and the Romans weren't actually that tough
on language. They weren't like, no, you have to
speak Latin, you're Roman now, you must speak Latin.
They weren't like that at all. They kind of
just let people carry on doing their own thing.
But of course, as the Romans would have their
higher power, Latin would have been a huge influence.
So Latin would have been everywhere, even if you
did, even if you weren't, if you were like
just a farmer in ancient Iberia. You wouldn't be
forced to speak Latin, but the people you're sending
your taxes to, they would be speaking Latin. So
it kind of, a lot of these languages kind
of evolved from Latin intermixing with the local tongues.
And for example, so, and this evolved into something
known as vulgar Latin, which the vulgar Latin isn't
one specific language, it's multiple different forms of Latin
that kind of emerged. Across the continent. And it
was those vulgar Latins, these weird hybrids of Latin
and other local languages and dialects, which would eventually
form languages like Portuguese, like French, like Spanish, like
even Italian. Italian's got a big Germanic influence because
once Rome fell, uh, Germanic speakers took over the
peninsula. And so it even has that influence there,
even if you go eastwards, Romania, Romania is this
fascinating example of a romance language in the heart
of Eastern Europe. It's bizarre and great. I love
it. And that is once again comes from, I
think, like a more Slavic the a more slag
of, oh my God, I can't say anything right
now, a more Slavic influence on the language happening
there.
Yeah, no, Romanian is really a very interesting example
because I, I mean it's a bit hard at
least if you look at the map geographically to
understand how Romance languages appeared er right next to
Italy, and Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, and then suddenly
Romania, the other side of Europe.
So I mean, I, I would love to know
as a Romance speaker yourself. Have you ever heard
Romanian, like, have you ever
like, uh, just a little bit. I noticed that
there are some similarities there, but I can't really
understand it that well. No,
it's not like English and Dutch, like Dutch just
looks like a silly version of English in many
cases where like if, if, if you speak English
you can kind of understand Dutch cos they look
so they look kind of alike to one another.
That's not the case with Portuguese and Romanian I'm
guessing.
Uh, NO, I don't think so. No, not that
I've ever heard much Romanian, but what I've heard,
uh, I didn't understand a lot. I noticed some
similarities, but that was about it, so. Yeah,
OK, that's interesting to know.
OK, so let's perhaps try to cover one or
two languages from each continent here. So, uh, in
the book when it comes to Africa, you talk
about the Bantu languages. So what are the Bantu
languages and how did they spread across Africa?
So the Bantu languages, is, it's not one language
in particular, it's a large group of languages. It
includes things like Swahili and Zulu, to just name
a couple of them. They're probably two of the
most. Swahili I think is the most spoken Bantu
language with Zulu being another, uh, pretty popular one
of them. They are a group of languages that
are part of the larger. Atlantic Congo language family,
once again, I would need to check that. If
you've got the book in front of you, Ricardo,
I say at the start, there's that list of
language families at the start that um explains it
quite succinctly where it is. But like I said,
my brain's a sieve, I write something then it
just disappears straight away again and I'm working on
the next thing. Uh, IT'S, so it's part of
a larger, much larger language family, it's the most
dominant tongue, uh, it's the most dominant branch of
that family. Started I believe in modern day Cameroon
thousands and thousands and thousands of years ago. Uh,
AND when we think of Bantu tongues, it's kind
of like those textbook African languages. When we think
of like the languages of Africa, things like Swahili,
it, it's really is stuff like that, they're great
and they all began that one spot. And from
there through the great Bantu migrations and expansion of
the people, once again it's all about the people.
They just, the, the language is almost sort of
second place to this. It's, it's, it just happens
to be the language these people are speaking. We
have started as one language called Proto-Bantu, and for
one reason or another, I won't get into it
because we talk about it in the book, uh,
it spreads, it spread pretty much across all of
sub-Saharan Africa. It's incredible.
Yeah, yeah, no, no, it's, it's really interesting. I,
I was seeing here because in the meanwhile I
opened your book and uh you say here that
uh Bantu tongues include the likes of Zulu, Xhosa,
Lingala, Swahili, so I think those were the languages
you were trying to refer to there.
They are the, thank you very much, as I
said. Like I might have wrote it, but the
reason I write it down is so I don't
have to keep it in here.
Yeah, sure, yeah. OK, and what about, uh, let's
talk about the Middle East now, what about Arabic?
I mean, is there anything special about Arabic and
um how did this, how did it spread across
North Africa, for example?
So Arabic is, it's one of, it's probably, hm,
am I gonna make a bold claim here? I
might say Arabic is the Asian language that has
spread the furthest. Nothing else is coming to mind.
Maybe Mandarin, as, as the, well, we'll get to
that, I imagine. Uh, Mandarin has spread quite far
wide or just Chinese languages as a whole. But
Arabic, uh, when it comes to country that countries
that speak it dominantly, Arabic is probably the most
successful language of Asia. Uh, IT began in the
Middle East in Saudi Arabia. No, sorry, not Saudi
Arabia, that, that country didn't exist yet on the
Arabian Peninsula. Uh, AND the main reason this one
spread was down to religion. It was the tongue
of Islam. And as the Islam, Islamic, uh, emirates
and empires decided to expand to bring that religion
to more parts of the world, and in turn,
Arabic came along for the ride too. Uh, IT
spread through there and of course it, if you
think about where the Arabian Peninsula is in the
world, to its, uh, east you have, uh, more
of like, uh, more sort of centrally sort of
Asia. You get, um, and they did go that
way. You've got countries like Afghanistan, Pakistan, uh, very
much Muslim countries, but then they went west as
well into North Africa, which is directly over there.
I mean you've got Egypt, you've got literally all
of North Africa. They're primarily Arabic speaking countries, or
at least, and
they even arrived here in Portugal and Spain as
well.
Of course they did, yeah, that's a bit, that's
something I don't actually talk about all too deeply
in the book. If I had to do a
sequel. Uh, DEFINITELY the, cos there is still influence
in, uh, Portugal and Spain, but it's not as
dominant as, um, North Africa is for sure. But
no, um, they did, and you, you see is
what I love is if you look at where
Arabic is spoken, you can easily follow their pattern.
They clearly went Saudi Arabia, sorry, Arabia here all
the way across North Africa and then up across,
uh, Gibraltar into Spain. It's great. Mhm. But yeah,
like that's the main reason Arabic is so widely
spoken. Uh, BEYOND its homeland of Arabia. It mainly
comes to religion, that that spread of Islam across
all these parts of the world and they took
Arabic with them.
Yeah. So er another way that language is spread
of course was through colonization. So tell us about,
for example, how English arrived in Ireland.
So English's arrival in Ireland is kind of the
prototype for what English would do later down the
line, so. Obviously English really hit the big time
during the more sort of peak age of colonization
when it arrived in the Americas, when it arrived
in like parts of Australia, New Zealand. And even
further down the line were like the scramble for
Africa, which is something else that we, we discussed
in the book and how English became so dominant
in various parts of the er continent. India as
well to name an example. Uh, HOW it arrived
in Ireland is kind of where that all began.
It was, it happened way later. A lot of
those stories, as I said, happened in kind of
the 17th to 18th, 19th century. Uh, English's arrival
in Ireland happened in the 13th century, I believe.
Way, way, way further back, and it makes sense
that English would first out of every, any land
mass that English would arrive in that isn't Britain.
It makes sense it would be Ireland just because
of geographic proximity. Uh, THIS came about due to
some squabbling, putting it very lightly. Uh, SORRY to
upset my Irish. Uh, ANYONE who's Irish watching this
squabbling was a much, very much an understatement, um.
Ireland, English came to Ireland down to the fact
that the English took over Ireland and for the
longest time through uh that came down to some
kings and uh rulers in Ireland kind of being
banished from the country and then that banished uh
ruler, uh going to England, hey, hey, can you
help me get my land back and it kind
of all stemmed from there. We talk about it
more in the book, um, yeah, and from there
and then English had a hole, a big hold
on Ireland for so long, part of. Uh, Ireland,
Northern Ireland is still part of the UK to
this day, and even to this day, Irish, English
is still the dominant tongue of, uh, Ireland.
Mhm. Yeah, and I mean, and this is more
on my end of the globe I guess, um,
uh, talking about Spain and Portugal and how the
two empires formed and conquered, uh. Most or all
I guess of Latin America. I mean why is
it that almost every country in the Americas below
the US has Spanish as the official language except
for Brazil?
Yeah, so there's also, um, sorry, I'm being real
potent. There's a, oh well, French Guiana isn't part
of that is literally just part of France. There's
Suriname as well, which speaks Dutch. It, it's, it's
an odd one. So that kind of, once again
it comes down to resources and who wanted what.
Uh, SO I believe obviously Columbus was the first
to, I'm good, uh, for the podcast listeners, I'm
doing big quotation. Bunny ears right now, discovered the
Americas. He didn't discover it. There are already people
living there. Uh, BUT he's the one who's kind
of seen as opening the Americas to Europe and
kind of it's, I think Columbus first landed in
Barbados, I believe, oh no, the Bahamas even, he
first landed in the Bahamas. And then from there,
once he was aware of it, the Spanish got
there. The Portuguese got there, it's just where they
landed and you, you're saying why it's below uh
the US. Mhm. I, you gotta remember that that's
only how the world looks today that we see
in Canada English, the US, I mean Canada's French
English, US English. There's a huge and for huge
chunks of time, parts of the US, well under
Spanish rule, Florida I believe was a Spanish, uh,
colony. When you think about how the land was
sort of split up in the past, not all
of America was under English speaking rule. There were
parts of it under Spanish rule, uh, California, Florida.
I mean, there's still huge Hispanic, Spanish speaking populations
in those more southern states, even in the northern
states as well. There's a huge Hispanic culture in
America, so you kind of say, oh, it's English,
not, not quite, and historically, definitely not. So it
would kind of the, the, the end result we
have now. Of English, English, Latin languages. That's, that's
the Americas explained very simply, English, English, Latin languages.
Uh, THE reason we have it that way today
is that's kind of just the end result, or
even the end result, just how it currently is
on our planet due to those foreign powers fighting
over it for land, for wealth, for resources. That's
just kind of how it's settled out for now
anyway. I, I, I can't, I don't imagine it's
changing any any time soon, but you know, this
definitely isn't the end of history.
Yeah, yeah, for sure. So uh I mean I
guess we've already talked here a little bit about
also how English arrived in the what is now
the US and Canada and French in Canada as
well,
so yeah.
Uh, uh, NO, yeah, go ahead. Were you going
to say anything,
or? Yeah, I was just gonna say how like
I have this little thought theory like are French
Canadians Latin Americans? Cos by definition they're Americans who
speak a Latin tongue. And that's just something I
always like to think about, like, are French Canadians
Hispanic, well, not Hispanic, but are they Latinos? Like,
I wonder. But it's just a fun little musing.
No, yeah, that that that's interesting. So I mean,
uh, in the book you also talk about the
Caribbean, so, uh, how is it that there are
Creole languages there?
One word, slavery. Yay, no, yeah, well I say
that's a very ironic yeah I put in there.
Uh, THE Creole tongues of the Caribbean are super
fascinating. They, and it comes down to the fact
that there was so much slavery from Spanish, Portuguese,
I think the like Spanish, Portuguese and British Empires.
Stealing people from West Africa to work on their
plantations, their farms in their new land, they needed
people to work there, they, they weren't gonna do
the jobs themselves because, but why would they? They
did want to try and get um indigenous peoples
to help out, but I think a large majority
of indigenous populations of these kind of these uh
places we've wiped out or they kind of escaped
into the depths of Brazil, you know, where we
still see them today and whatnot. Um, YEAH, so
they just literally stole because they would, cos the
people in Western Africa were deemed to be lesser
for a variety of factors due to the color
of their skin, due to the fact that they
were less, and once again the quote marks coming
out are less civilized than how the Europeans were
living in that time. The European speakers, the European
people felt we're better than you, you're not real
people, we can steal you and put you somewhere
else to work. It's a horrible barbaric thing. And
it did have a resoundingly huge impact on the
languages of the Caribbean, especially, uh, places like Haiti,
an example, uh, Cuba, uh, all, all across the
Caribbean, these sort of um. These, uh, Pidgin languages,
these Creoles came into being due to just absolutely
unexpected people intermingling with one another. Imagine just a
few 100 years before sort of these Creoles came
into being. Western African people in places like Jamaica,
seems like that can't happen, but unfortunately it did
and it, it, it, that's how we've ended up
where we are today. One I do enjoy. And
I find this really funny, I don't think I
mentioned this in the book and it's not so
much about languages, it's about accents. Um, Jamaica. Ended
up with a quite, ended up with Irish people
working there as well. I don't think they were
slaves in the same way West African people were.
But I think kind of a lot of Irish
people ended up going to work in Jamaica as
well. And the Irish accent, when you think of
two very different accents, the Irish and Jamaican accent
are two very, very, very different accents, but Irish
actually had a huge part in forming that modern
Jamaican accent. And we hear it best of how
they say the TH sound. If you say free
in an Irish or Jamaican accent, I won't do
it here because I don't want to offend anyone
with my terrible impressions. But if you say free
in an Irish or Jamaican accent, they both use
that hard T-like sound for a free. And oh
yeah, there, there is, there is a connection between
the two of them. And that's uh, it, it's
not something I mention in the book, but that's
another great example of how, uh, people migrating can
affect languages and how we speak in different parts
of the world.
Yeah, uh, uh, no, uh, you know, it's, uh,
while I was reading your book and when I
arrived at these bits where, er, languages spread through
colonization. Uh, I mean, of course, it's really an
interesting read, it is, but at the same time,
it's really sad because it reminds me of the
awful, awful things that my ancestors, the ancestors of
the Spanish people, your ancestors as well, I imagine,
uh. The across the Americas, Africa, and so on
and so forth. Right.
It, it is, it's, it is terrible. And I
guess, uh, myself and yourself have quite a different
cos we are, like you said, we're the ancestors
of those people. So we do, I guess, feel
some kind of, oh darn, like that's bad. That's
some really bad stuff like I believe um. The
Portuguese did actually, I'm not, I'm not, once again,
I'm not trying to blame you per se on
this Ricardo, definitely not. But I think it's the
Portuguese who have like the high like I think
the Portuguese brought more slaves to Brazil than literally
the rest of like uh the new world combined,
like, oh my God, there were some awful things
happening in
this. Yeah, probably, probably. I think that in history
we are either. Number 2 or number 1 in
terms of the nations that promote uh promoted slavery
the most. So I, I, I think that if
we're not 1 then it should be the UK,
but I, I'm not sure. So
yeah, it should be us no that sounds very
bad. What we should be number 1. No, that's
the one thing you do not want to be
number 1 in. No, um, and it, it kind
of, it, it reflects so much on our modern
societies as well. Um, I don't know if this
is, this is a massive tangent. I don't know
if this is reflective in Portugal, but here in
the UK, especially in England, we're having a bit
of a patriotism, nationality crisis. Like people are being
like, oh, what, why am I not allowed, why
am I not allowed to be proud to be,
there's always been this thing in the, the UK
that like we're not like how you see in
America, people raise the flag and salute the flag.
We've never really done that much here in the
UK and people are starting to be like, well
what, what, why, why, why is it bad to
be proud to be British? And I kind of
wanna tell these people because we did a lot
of bad things in the past and that flag
has a lot of blood and death and slavery
associated with it. It's got a bad reputation, whereas
like the American flag has this image of freedom
of fighting off these guys, it, it, it comes
with that kind of struggle. I think a lot
of this kind of national pride often is coincides
with sort of a a national struggle, and to
fight for that pride and we've never really had
that here in the UK so that's why I've
always been a bit odd with patriotism and people
are trying to. If you wanna know why, that's
kind of why. So that's a, that's a really
big tangent, but just, just something on my chest
I had to get out. I don't know if
that's the same in Portugal though.
So one interesting thing that you talk about in
your book is also languages that we can find
in Antarctica. So, uh I I mean, I, I,
what kinds of languages can we find there?
So Antarctica's a really interesting case in the realm
of language cos it's kind of everything and nothing.
So many like uh it's weirdly linguistically diverse Antarctica
because so many different countries have research bases on
the continent. That all kinds of languages have been
spoken there, English, Spanish, Portuguese, uh, Finnish, uh, Russian,
Chinese, uh Mandarin, Chinese, whatever, you know, the, the
wider Chinese languages, Japanese, Arabic. It's resoundingly linguistically diverse.
The only problem is that those languages are only
there for like 6 months tops before they go
away again, cause you can't live in Antarctica permanently.
No one, no one lives in Antarctica, uh, 24/7.
They come, they do research, they disappear again. So
while there is this huge degree of linguistical diversity
that has existed in Antarctica, it's not like all
these different speakers are kind of merging together with
one another to make some sort of universal language
or anything like that. They're literally there and go,
and they don't really interact too much with one
another, so you do get all these languages in
Antarctica. Because people, I mean, I think it was
decreed that Antarctica can only be used for scientific
purposes, we're not allowed to mine it or claim
it as a country. So there's people there studying
science stuff, putting it scientifically, and then disappearing again.
So yeah, it's a really fascinating case and it's
kind of similar to what's going on up in
space as well. There's a whole chapter about languages
in space. Sorry if I beat you to asking
me about it, but it's kind of a similar
situation. Space is really linguistically diverse, but. It's not
there for long enough to have any real impact.
So, um, how, uh, uh, this is also another
thing that you talk about in your book and
your channel as well. How do sign languages relate
to spoken languages?
So My kind of my gut answer to how
the sign languages relate to spoken languages is kind
of not at all. They're so different to one
another. I think a lot of people and myself
included before I kind of researched into it, I
kind of presumed sign languages were like just a
physical way of representing our spoken language or written
out language. Like if it it before I studied
sign languages, if someone asked me how do you
sign the letter A, I would have just gone
like, you know. I would have just done, done
that like, oh, surely you just do it as
a neighbor, but that's not the case at all.
Sign languages are kind of, they are kind of
like their own unique languages in the same way
and evolved. Granted they're a little bit more artificially
of their evolution, but they are so different to
spoken languages and so com so completely different to
them. And they have their own stories as well
behind them. They're, they're not that similar at all.
I've spoken languages and sign languages are two completely
different kettles of fish in, in my estimation.
Mhm, YEAH, that's really interesting. So let me ask
you about another er Asian language. So how is
Mandarin spreading across the globe?
So yeah, this is, this is the final chapter
of the book. Oh, spoilers, so you know, make
sure you've read it before you see this bit.
No, so there is a hypothesis that Mandarin might
become the world's next lingua franca. Uh, FOR those
who don't know, a lingua franca. Uh YEAH,
explain what a lingua franca is, please.
A lingua franca is basically a language that is
used when people who speak different languages interact with
one another. For example, English. Once again, I just
need to say, Ricardo, despite your English is superb
and. Whenever I speak to someone, no, no, it's
absolutely superb. You're, you're, you're Portuguese, you're speaking English
better than I, better than I do. I'm always
like, oh man, I really need to learn more
languages, but it's kind of the card you're dealt
in life. Being a native English speaker is such
a double-edged sword because you kind of get to
this point where you just expect everyone else to
speak it, and English is our world's lingua franca
at the moment. It is the world's number one
language. When we think about. Situations where people from
different parts of the world come to communicate with
one another, whether that be a UN meeting or
even like the Olympics or my personal favorite, Eurovision,
when it comes to something like that. It's 9
out of 10 times they're speaking English because due
to the huge importance English has, due to the
UK's empire and. What, what impact that empire had,
it created the USA which is now the world's
only dominant superpower, and they speak English and we
speak English. So it's kind of just resulted in
English becoming our modern lingua franca. But uh going
back to Mandarin, there is this belief due to
the momentum China is picking up on the world
stage from production, from even from a cultural standpoint,
uh, this is such a weird thing, like the
biggest film of last year, I don't know how
to pronounce its name. It was an animated Chinese
movie. It made like $2 billion or something. It
was the most successful financial, like financially successful film
of 2025. And it was Mandarin, it was Chinese,
like it's grown hugely popular. More and more people
are realizing, hey, China's becoming a such big dominant
player on the world stage, it might surpass the
USA, who knows? It's all a very big hypothetical,
but people are preparing for it. There are people
who are kind of studying Mandarin in the same
way. I'm guessing, Ricardo, were you taught English at
school?
Uh, YES.
Yeah, cos cos it's seen as the language that
oh you must learn English to do so. Obviously
we're taught English at school, but that's cos it's
our native language. There are cases of um. Like
there's cases of people being taught Mandarin as kids
cos it's believed to be this is going to
be the language you're going to need to know
in the future to to be a player on
the world stage. So it's all very hypothetical. Uh,
WHETHER it actually happens or not remains to be
seen, but there is that sort of belief that
Mandarin might become the next English, for lack of
a better term.
Uh, uh, DO you know if there's any other
language besides Mandarin that could replace English as the
lingua franca in the future?
So I have a really silly answer to this
one. HOLD on, I'll I'll I'll, I'll, I'll think
about it for a minute and then I'll say
my silly answer. In regards to another language that
could become the next lingua franca, it's. It's hard
to see, maybe like at a push, Spanish. Purely
because the fact that so much of the world
speaks it. And because it's got influence, there's, there's
a lot of influential, influential countries that speak Spanish,
um, like Spain, of course, huge swaths of South
America, Mexico, Argentina, just, you know, off the top
of my head. Potentially Spanish, but I also just
don't see it fully being there. French is another
great example. French is, I think it's called the
language of, um, oh, what's the word I'm looking
for? The, the language of bureaucracy, um, I can't
remember what the exact term is, but French has
historically kind of been this lingua franca in politics,
in, uh, government, in law as well. French is
often used, so maybe French, uh, apart from them,
I don't think any of them have the speaking
population or sway. That, um, English does, you could
argue something like Hindi, Hindi's spoken by so many
people and obviously Urdu, Hindi and Urdu are more
or less one and the same tongue just with
different written forms. There's more to it than that,
but for for for simple sake, let's just say
that. Hindi's got a huge speaking population cos so
much of India speaks it, but even then again,
India isn't the biggest player on the world stage.
It's getting there, don't get me wrong, but it
hasn't it hasn't got that sway just yet. English
is in this really unique spot where it's got
a huge speaking population. And those who speak are
quite influential and powerful countries like the USA like
us here in the UK to name a couple.
Um, BUT then as for my silly answer I
hinted towards, it's emoji, right? Emoji is like already
up. It's already the lingua franca. Like it's, it's
already a universal tongue. Everyone understands emoji. It's brilliant.
I love emoji to pieces. Like you could, you,
a smiley face is a smiley face, no matter
the only issue with, uh, emoji is it hasn't
really got a spoken form yet. We could try
and figure that out at some point, but, um,
it really, uh, I, I think emoji is one
of the closest things we get to, to having
another lingua franca on the world stage, like genuinely.
And they're great, not only like it's easy to
compare them to something like hieroglyphics cos they're logographic,
but emoji is so much more than that. While
like a hieroglyph of an I can only really
mean an I, an emoji can mean so many
different things. I love the upside down smiley face.
Let's say at face value, it's just a smiley
face turned upside down, but it holds so much
more deeper meaning to it. Like I always send
that one to people where I'm annoyed, like, oh
great, the dishwasher just broke, upside down smiley face,
cos it just, it's so interpretable in so many
great ways. And then you've got things like the
aubergine emoji as well, which, yeah, is an aubergine.
But also eggplant, I don't know what term you
know for.
Uh, EGGPLANT, yeah, yeah,
eggplant, sorry, in British English they're known as aubergines.
Uh, NO,
but, but I, I, I, I knew what you
were referring to, yes. Oh, OK,
cool, yeah, like, yeah, it's just an eggplant, but
also, yeah, something more. So that's my silly answer
to that. I think if I had to, if
someone said like, hey, what's the next lingua franca
gonna be? I would probably say emoji.
Uh, THAT'S, that's funny. So, uh, uh, uh, two
more questions then. Um, HOW does the migration of
languages manifest in how people who speak different languages
deal with one another?
It can manifest in all different ways, it kind
of gives people. An understanding of their history. If
I'm talking to say an American in the US
who speaks English and wants to get like yeah,
it makes me go, oh OK, I know who
you are, I know. How you got here, I
know that you're most likely, and it's not 100%
accurate all the time, but you have some sort
of European ancestry running through you to get to
that point, and it kind of makes you realize,
oh, you're a product of this sort of thing.
It can affect people in other ways too. Um,
IT can be negative as well. So in the
book I talk about how Polish has become England's
second most spoken tongue behind English, of course. This
is a more recent thing. Uh, THIS is great,
this, and with this has come all kinds of
negative interpretations. Uh, I lived somewhere, um. I lived
somewhere before I moved to where I live in
the UK now, er we had a real high
Polish population. And it was for a variety of
factors. You, you can read about it in the
book, but for a variety of factors, a huge
Polish migration happened in the early 2000s, and I,
I don't think it's still going on anymore. Cheers
Brexit, not cheers Brexit, don't, don't think I was
being honest when I said that, um. And it
kind of made a real unpleasant atmosphere for a
lot of the, a lot of English people were
angry, oh, the Polish are coming, they're taking all
our jobs, we're all gonna be speaking Polish soon.
So that kind of manifested in a lot of
negativity. It kind of made people angry that people
who were speaking a different language were coming here.
And when certain English speaking people in my old
hometown with a high Polish population. When they started
speaking to someone and realized the person talking back
to them was speaking say broken English in a
thick Polish accent. It really shaped the impression, oh,
you must be one of those people who have
come over here to take all the jobs. Obviously
that's. It's not true. I was gonna say a
stronger word there, but I'll just say that's not
true. Uh, IT so it can, it can have
positive images, it can help us understand someone's history
in a very broad strokes, and it can unfortunately
shape someone's opinion on someone. Someone, a lot of
people will judge people solely on the language they
speak, not the quality of their character, which sucks,
quite frankly. I mean,
even sometimes just on the basis of their accent.
Right,
mhm, yeah, even just on their accent, gosh, yeah,
even if they're speaking perfect English or perfect Portuguese
in your case, not like, oh my gosh, sorry
that I was just saying an example, your how
your English should go. I'm not judging you by
your accent by any means, but, um, you could
be speaking perfect English, but if you've got an
accent of some kind, there are people out there
who will judge you. They might even think lesser
because you're speaking in an accent different to theirs.
And of course it can change from accent to
accent. Some accents have this real great reputation behind
them. Say like thinking like things like the Italian
accent or the French accent or the Irish accent,
they're really beloved ones, or the I think the
Australians voted the most beloved accent. That, that can
make people go, oh nice, cool. Whereas there's other
accents out there that haven't gotten as good reputation.
I mentioned Polish in example, that's particularly in the
UK to many people it's got a negative connotation
to it. Uh, EVEN things like, uh, Asian, certain
Asian accents, like, um, Middle Eastern kind of accents,
due to unfortunately like global events, they might have
a more negative connotation about them to a certain
demographic of people. Those people are idiots. I just
want to stress that clearly. If you're judging someone
based solely on their accent, yeah, you're not, you're,
you're, you're not a friend of mine, mate.
Yeah, so, uh, one last question then, uh, I've
already asked you, uh, I've already asked you about
what you think could be the next lingua franca.
How do you look at the future more generally
of language migration and evolution?
Gosh, it's a tough one to think what's gonna
happen. I mean, language is gonna continuously move. And
if you go so, so, so, so, so far
into the future, I guess hypothetically, yes, we, we
would, we will reach this point where there is
just one singular language. I'm talking like millions of
years, hypothetically that may happen. But I think languages
just carry on moving and evolving and they're gonna
move and evolve in new ways. Uh, THINK of
something, I, I think a great example of this
is Korean. Due to a huge interest in sort
of South Korean culture. Think K-pop, think Squid Games,
think that, uh, Netflix film K-pop Demon Hunters. Uh,
South Korean, yeah, specifically South Korean media, not North
Korea. I don't know what they're doing up there.
But South Korean media has become, uh, hugely interested
in a lot of younger people, which has led
a lot of younger people wanting to learn the
Korean language. So I think a way languages are
going to migrate more. Is I, I'd like to
think that we won't get language migrations in more
brutal fashions in the future in the way how
English ended up in the US or how, um,
Portuguese ended up in Brazil. I hope we don't
end up with more migrations like that in the
future. I can't say it won't happen, but you
know, I, if you don't mind me talking about
more topical things, in a few, in, in, in
however many years' time, Venezuela might be speaking American
for all we know, and yeah, I say they're
speaking American. Uh, YOU know, stuff like that could
happen, even something like, this is all hypotheticals, uh,
Russian could become the dominant language of Ukraine, an
example. Things like that could happen. We could see
language migrations happen in more brutal fashions based on
current world events, but I'm more hopeful that won't
happen. I'm more hopeful that we'll get the sort
of more softer cultural migrations of languages, people actively
choosing to learn our language. Because it's something they
want to learn, like young people here in the
UK wanting to learn Korean because they watch Squid
Game, I think that's great.
Yeah, so let's end on that hopeful note, uh,
and the book is again Immigrant Tongues exploring how
languages moved, evolved and defined this. I'm of course
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And, and Patrick, just before we go
apart from your YouTube channel, which I will also
link in the description, where can people find you?
On the internet.
Gosh, people can find me pretty much everywhere on
the internet. Uh, I'm on Instagram, Name ExplainYT. I'm
on Blue Sky. Maybe just Name Explain or Name
ExplainYT, I cannot remember. I'm on YouTube as you
mentioned. You can find my books on Amazon or
any other place you choose to buy books from.
Uh, THERE'S a nameplain subreddit. I'm trying to think
where else I am. I'm not on Twitter, that's
for sure. I'm not on Twitter anymore, so don't
try and follow me there cos. If someone's trying
to claim to be me, that ain't me. They're
the places you can mainly find me. I mainly
hang on Instagram these days, it's a real fun
place when you do it right. I'm Reddit a
lot as well. Uh, BUT yeah, mainly it's just
the YouTube channel which Ricardo, as you mentioned, you'll
have very kindly linked down below. But yeah, you
can find me if you just search Na explain,
if you search Patrick Foote, I will probably pop
up somewhere.
Great, so Patrick, thank you so much for doing
this. It's been really fun to talk with you.
Yeah, it's
been so fun, thank you for having me, Ricardo.
Yeah, no, it's been great times.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gelbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.